Student Habits vs Academic Performance in Tableau
Date: 05/04/2025

Objective:
Understand which lifestyle and environmental factors impact student academic performance.

Data Source: 
URL: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/jayaantanaath/student-habits-vs-academic-performance

Dataset Description: Contains features such as gender, study hours, social media hours, Netflix hours, part-time job, and attendance. 
CSV
Columns: 16
Rows: 1000

Assumptions & Limitations: This dataset was synthetically generated based on realistic patterns from existing datasets. Thus these results are not entirely applicable to the real-world. 

Data Cleaning & Preprocessing

Minimal cleaning and preprocessing was necessary since the dataset was synthetically generated. I used MS Excel to search for missing or irregular values using "Find & Select" and found none.

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Summary Statistics:
- Average age: 20 
- Average exam score: 69.60
- Average study hours per day: 3.5
- Average attendance percentage: 84.13
- Average exercise frequency: 3 days per week
- Average mental health rating: 5.4/10
- Average hours spent watching Netflix: 1.8
- Average hours of sleep per night: 6.4
- Average hours spent on social media: 2.5



Key Insights:

There were only minimal differences, by roughly one percentage, between groups in the categories of gender, extracurricular participation, diet quality, internet quality, parental education level, and part-time job status. 

There is a positive correlation between the number of hours slept per night and the average exam score. Students who slept around three hours a night averaged a 62% and those who slept eight or above averaged at 70% or above.

Students who exercised more, on average, scored higher on their exam. Students who exercised two days a week scored 5% higher than those who only exercised once. Those students who exercised six days a week scored 75% on average, while those who did not exercise at all score 66% on average.

Mental health rating (MHR) also appears to indicate exam score. There is a clear upward trend of exam scores from an MHR of 1 to 10. Students with an MHR of 1 scored an average of 62% while those students with an MHR of 10 scored an average of 78%.

Two variables that strongly correlate with worse exam scores are Netflix Hours and Social Media Hours. For those students who watched zero hours of Netflix, they scored 76% on average. However, those students who watched 2 or more hours of Netflix were more likely to score less than 70% on their exam. Likewise, those students who did not use social media had average exam scores of 76%. However, there is a negatively proportional relationship between the two variables. Students who spent 2 hours or more on social media were likely to score less than 70% on their exam. 

Unsurprisingly, exam scores and study hours per day are strongly positively correlated. Students who did not study at all scored an average of 30% on their exam, whereas those who studied 5 or more hours were far more likely to score 80% or more on their exam. 

One surprising outcome was the relationship between exam scores and attendance percentage. There was only a slightly positive correlation between the two variables. Some students who had weaker attendance percentages scored strongly and some who had strong attendance percentages scored weakly.


Results

Summary of Findings:

Based on the analysis, student success, in terms of exam scores, is impacted by how students spend their time and how mentally well they are. Specifically, students are more likely to succeed if they sleep well, exercise more than once a week, and spend more of their time studying rather than on social media or Netflix. 

Business or Research Implications:
These findings can help parents encourage healthier habits and promote better outcomes for their children. Additionally, this analysis can help indicate areas of further research, especially regarding the role of exercise and social media/ entertainment in student success. Finally, this analysis can be used to inform decision-making in educational or student-centered organizations whose mission is to promote educational success.

Limitations:

A major limitation of this dataset is its distance from the primary source. Although it was synthetically generated based on real-world data, it may not accurately reflect student behavior in the real-world. This analysis should be interpreted with caution and is best suited to inform future research efforts rather than current business or organizational decisions. 


Conclusion & Recommendations

In conclusion, the success of a student, in terms of exam score, is impacted by the duration of their sleep, how often they exercise, how much they study, and how much time they spend on Netflix and social media. Further research into how these factors impact student success is needed, especially considering the popularity and ubiquity of social media and entertainment services such as Netflix. Rigorous and academic research into these areas may help parents and school districts adapt to our increasingly digitized world and address the challenges of struggling students.
